feat(deepagents): add python documentation (#957)
langchain-ai/docs: src/oss/deepagents/middleware.mdx

---

> title: Deep Agents Middleware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Deep Agents Middleware
sidebarTitle: Middleware
```

description: Understand the middleware that powers deep agents
---

> Deep Agents are built with a modular middleware architecture. As a reminder, Deep Agents have access to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deep agents are built with a modular middleware architecture. Deep agents have access to the following:
```

1. A planning tool
2. A filesystem for storing context and long-term memories
3. The ability to spawn subagents

> Each of these features is implemented as separate middleware. When you create a deep agent with `create_deep_agent`, we automatically attach `PlanningMiddleware`, `FilesystemMiddleware` and `SubAgentMiddleware` to your agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these features is implemented as separate middleware. When you create a deep agent with `create_deep_agent`, `PlanningMiddleware`, `FilesystemMiddleware`, and `SubAgentMiddleware` are automatically attached to your agent.
```

Middleware is a composable concept, and you can choose to add as many or as few middleware to an agent depending on your use case. That means that you can use any of the aforementioned middleware independently!

In the next sections, we'll dive into exactly what each of these middleware provides an agent on its own.

## Planning Middleware

> Planning is integral to solving complex problems. If you've used claude code recently, you'll notice how it writes out a To-Do list before tackling complex, multi-part tasks. You'll also notice how it can adapt and update this To-Do list on the fly as more information comes in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Planning is integral to solving complex problems. If you've used Claude Code recently, you'll notice how it writes out a To-Do list before tackling complex, multi-part tasks. You'll also notice how it can adapt and update this To-Do list on the fly as more information comes in.
```

i wouuld maybe generalize this more-- like "Planning is integral to solving complex problems. By creating a to-do list before... an agent can ensure task completeness and correctness. It is also beneficial to be able to update this to-do list as more information is gathered."

> `PlanningMiddleware` provides your agent with a tool specifically for updating this To-Do list. Before, and while it executes a multi-part task, the agent is prompted to use the `write_todos` tool to keep track of what its doing, and what still needs to be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PlanningMiddleware` provides your agent with a tool specifically for updating this to-do list. Before, and while it executes a multi-part task, the agent is prompted to use the `write_todos` tool to keep track of what its doing, and what still needs to be done.
```

`FilesystemMiddleware` provides four tools to your agent to interact with both short-term and long-term memory.

- **ls**: List the files in your filesystem
- **read_file**: Read an entire file, or a certain number of lines from a file
- **write_file**: Write a new file to your filesystem
- **edit_file**: Edit an existing file in your filesystem

```python
from deepagents import create_deep_agent
from deepagents.middleware.filesystem import FilesystemMiddleware

# FilesystemMiddleware is included by default in create_deep_agent
# You can customize it if building a custom agent
agent = create_deep_agent(
    model="anthropic:claude-sonnet-4-20250514",
    tools=[],
    middleware=[
        FilesystemMiddleware(
            long_term_memory=False,  # Enables access to long-term memory, defaults to False
            system_prompt="Write to the filesystem when...",  # Optional custom addition to the system prompt
            custom_tool_descriptions={
                "ls": "Use the ls tool when...",
                "read_file": "Use the read_file tool to..."
            }  # Optional: Custom descriptions for filesystem tools
        ),
    ],
)
```

> ### Short-term vs Long-term Filesystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Short-term vs. long-term filesystem
```
